---
layout: post
title: Curves in Surface (1)
tags: 
- AG
---
\\[\newcommand{\bA}{\mathbb{A}}
\newcommand{\bR}{\mathbb{R}}
\newcommand{\bC}{\mathbb{C}}
\newcommand{\bD}{\mathbb{D}}
\newcommand{\bF}{\mathbb{F}}
\newcommand{\bG}{\mathbb{G}}
\newcommand{\bH}{\mathbb{H}}
\newcommand{\bN}{\mathbb{N}}
\newcommand{\bP}{\mathbb{P}}
\newcommand{\bQ}{\mathbb{Q}}
\newcommand{\bT}{\mathbb{T}}
\newcommand{\bU}{\mathbb{U}}
\newcommand{\bZ}{\mathbb{Z}}
\newcommand{\cA}{\mathcal{A}}
\newcommand{\cB}{\mathcal{B}}
\newcommand{\cC}{\mathcal{C}}
\newcommand{\cD}{\mathcal{D}}
\newcommand{\cE}{\mathcal{E}}
\newcommand{\cF}{\mathcal{F}}
\newcommand{\cG}{\mathcal{G}}
\newcommand{\cH}{\mathcal{H}}
\newcommand{\cHom}{\mathcal{H}om}
\newcommand{\cI}{\mathcal{I}}
\newcommand{\cJ}{\mathcal{J}}
\newcommand{\cK}{\mathcal{K}}
\newcommand{\cL}{\mathcal{L}}
\newcommand{\cM}{\mathcal{M}}
\newcommand{\cN}{\mathcal{N}}
\newcommand{\cP}{\mathcal{P}}
\newcommand{\cT}{\mathcal{T}}
\newcommand{\cU}{\mathcal{U}}
\newcommand{\cX}{\mathcal{X}}
\newcommand{\fa}{\mathfrak{a}}
\newcommand{\fd}{\mathfrak{d}}
\newcommand{\fm}{\mathfrak{m}}
\newcommand{\fn}{\mathfrak{n}}
\newcommand{\fp}{\mathfrak{p}}
\newcommand{\fq}{\mathfrak{q}}
\newcommand{\Spec}{\mathrm{Spec}\,}\\]

# Before start

I try to write some pictures what is happening instead of writing a bunch of proof. I am (really) bad at English. Some sentences are not clear and there might be grammar issue. I didn't make 'comment' section. I will write my contact info later.

In this post, I assume we know upto chapter III.4 of \[1\] (just knowing definitions is fine)

# Goal

Given surface $S$, we want to check properties of intersection of two curves.

I followed a part of chapter IV and V of \[1\] but some of them are not proved in my post.

# Conventions, Facts

**Variety** means integral scheme over field $k$ whose structure morphism $X\rightarrow \Spec k$ is separated and of finite type. (Sometimes 'integral' condition can be changed into 'geometrically integral' but not in this note)

**Surface** means a nonsingular projective variety over an algebraically closed field whose dimension is $2$.

**Curve** means any effective (Weil) divisor of given surface. Usually, I write $S$ for surface and $C,D$ for curves. **Divisor** means Weil divisor and I will indicate **Cartier** divisor if I discuss about it.

**Point** of variety means closed point. If point is not closed, I will mention this.

Before start remark there is a one to one bijection between ($S$ is a surface)

- Line bundles on $S$, and
- The **divisor class group** (equivalent class of Weil divisors on $S$) on $S$.

where divisor $D$ on $S$ corresponds to line bundle $O_S(D)$. This is true for any noetherian, integral, separated locally factorial scheme $S$. For detail, see [1] Chapter II.6.

Recall Cartier divisor $D$ is effective if and only if $\cJ_X(D)$ is an ideal of $O_X$. We write $D$ for corresponding closed subscheme of $S$ defined by $\cJ_X(D)$. Given closed immersion $i:D\rightarrow X$, 
\\[(O_X/\cJ_X(D))|_D:=i^{-1}(O_X/\cJ_X(D))=O_D\\]
is a structure sheaf of $D$ and the pushforward of $O_D$ is same as $O_X/\cJ_X(D)$.

Abusing notation, we consider $O_D$ as a sheaf on $X$. It is pushforward of the $O_D$. Similarly, when there is a morphism $f:X\rightarrow Y$ of scheme, we consider $O_Y$-module $\cF$ as an $O_X$-module by pullback (so it means $f^*\cF$). Sheaf of differential usually written in this way. 

# Start

## Intersection number

We investigate 'good' definitions and properties.

### 1

Consider $S=\bP^2$ (with coordinate $[t:x:y]$) and $C=V(x)$, $D=V(y)$ be curves in $S$. As a set $C\cap D$ is a singleton (namely $[1:0:0]$). When we set curves $C=V(x^2)$, $D=V(y^2)$, $C\cap D$ is also a singleton. As a set, intersection number seems to be $1$ for both cases however we want to count multiplicity.

One good way to count multiplicity is checking on stalks (roughly speaking playing it on affine plane). Let $p=[1:0:0]$ and $Z=C\cap D$ be a closed subscheme of $S$ (of course it has more information than set $\{p\}$) for each cases and 
\\[R:=O_{Z,p}.\\]
When $C=V(x)$ and $D=V(y)$, $R=k$. When $C=x^2$ and $D=y^2$, $R=(k[x,y]/(x^2,y^2))_{(x,y)}$. In the second case, $R$ is a vector space over $k$ whose dimension $4$.

In general (in surface $S$ and curves $C$ and $D$), $C$ and $D$ meet **transversally** at $p\in C\cap D$ if local equation $f$ of $C$ and $g$ of $D$ generate the maximal ideal of $O_{S,p}$. In the example, $C=V(x)$ and $D=V(y)$ meet transversally, but $C=V(x^2)$ and $D=V(y^2)$ don't meet transversally.

In general, given surface $S$ and curves $C,D$, the definition of **intersection number** of curves is \\[C\cdot D:=\sum_{x\in C\cap D}m_x(C,D)\\]
where $m_x(C,D)$ is the dimension of $k$-vector space $O_{S,x}/(f,g)$ where $f$ and $g$ are local equations of $C$ and $D$, respectively.

### 2

We associate above with line bundle. If $C=V(f)\subset \bP^n$ is a curve of **degree** $d$ (meaning $f$ is a homogeneous polynomial of degree $d$ and we will define it in genral setting), then the ideal sheaf of $C$ is $O_X(d)$. (Hint: consider exact sequence \\[0\rightarrow A(-d)\xrightarrow{\times f} A\rightarrow A/(d)\rightarrow 0 \\]
where $A=k[x_0,\cdots,x_n]$). 

Note that the dimension of $O\_{S,x}/(f,g)$ (as a $k$-vector space) is same as the dimension of $k$-vector space $\Gamma(C\cap D,O\_{C\cap D})$. Our quick calculation gives \\[\begin{align}C\cdot D &=h^0(O_{C\cap D})\\\\ &= \chi(O_{C\cap D}) \\\\ &=\chi(O_C)-\chi(O_C(-D))\\\\ &= \chi(O_S)-\chi(O_S(-C))-\chi(O_S(-D))+\chi(O_S(-C-D))\end{align}\\]
where $h^i(\cF)$ is $\dim_k H^i(S,\cF)$ and $\chi(\cF)$ is given as \\[\sum_i(-1)^ih^i(\cF).\\]

The proof is observing these exact sequences.

\\[0\rightarrow O_C(-D)\rightarrow O_C\rightarrow O_{C\cap D}\rightarrow 0,\\]
\\[0\rightarrow O_S(-C)\rightarrow O_S\rightarrow O_{C}\rightarrow 0,\\]
and
\\[0\rightarrow O_S(-C-D)\rightarrow O_S(-D)\rightarrow O_{C}(-D)\rightarrow 0.\\]

In general if we have line bundles $\cL,\cL'$ on $S$, then we define

\\[\cL\cdot \cL':=\chi(O_S)-\chi(\cL^\vee)-\chi(\cL'^\vee) +\chi(\cL^\vee\otimes (\cL')^\vee).\\]

For example:
Let $S=\bP^2$ as usual. $\chi(O_S)=1$, $\chi(O_S(1))=3$, $\chi(O_S(-1))=0$, $\chi(O_S(2))=6$, $\chi(O_S(-2))=0$, $\chi(O_S(-4))=3$. I introduce useful theorem later for this.

1. When $C=V(x)$ and $D=V(y)$, then $O_C=O_X(1)=O_D$. The direct caculation with line bundle gives $O_C\cdot O_D=1=C\cdot D$.

2. When $C=V(x^2)$ and $D=V(y^2)$, then $O_C=O_X(2)=O_D$. The direct caculation with line bundle gives $O_C\cdot O_D=4=C\cdot D$.

### 2.5

(Very useful theorem for cohomology of line bundles on projective space)

It can be found in \[1\] but \[2\] Theorem 18.1.3 is more easy to see. Let $X=\bP^n_A$ for ring $A$. Then we have 
- If $m\geq 0$, then $H^0(X,O(m))$ is a free $A$-module with rank ${n+m \choose m}$.
- If $m\leq -n-1$, then $H^n(X,O(m))$ is a free $A$-module with rank ${-m-1 \choose -n-m-1}$
- Otherwese, $H^r(X,O(m))=0$.

We calculate canonical sheaf of $\bP^n_k$ for field $k$. Here is some result.

(\[1\] Example II.8.20.1,2) Let $X=\bP^n_k$. Then the canonical sheaf is given as $\omega_X\cong O_X(-n-1)$. Furthermore if $Y$ is a nonsingular **hypersurface** (variety of codimension $1$) of degree $d$ in $\bP^n$ for $n\geq 2$, $\omega_Y\cong O_Y(d-n-1)$.

I will not prove these in this post. We continue.

### 3

We introduce another interpretation of intersection numbers.

Note that the **degree of line bundle** $\cL$ on surface $S$ is the **degree of divisors** $D$ on $S$ where $\cL$ corresponds to $D$ and the degree is given as 
\\[\deg(D):=\sum_i n_i \\]
where $D=\sum_i n_i\[p_i\]$ with $p_i$ is a codimension $1$ of $D$ which is a point.

Let $C$ and $D$ be curves that meets transversally. Our claim is number of points $C\cap D$ is same as degree of $O_S(D)\otimes O_C$ (pull back of $O_S$ module to $O_C$).

Proof is straightfoward. Given exact sequence
\\[0\rightarrow O_S(-D)\rightarrow O_S\rightarrow O_D\rightarrow 0\\]

apply $\otimes O_C$ and we have 
\\[0\rightarrow O_S(-D)\otimes O_C\rightarrow O_C\rightarrow O_{C\cap D}\rightarrow 0.\\]


Then $C\cap D$ corresponds to ideal sheaf $O_S(D)\otimes O_C$. Using intersection is transversal, the degree of the divisor $C\cap D$ is just a number of points so does the degree of $O_S(D)\otimes O_C$. $\square$

I don't know good example of this. In general (for two curves $C,D$ contained in surface $S$) the intersection number $C\cdot D$ is given as the the number of points of $C'\cap D'= O_S(D')\otimes O_{C'}$ where $C'\in |C|$ (meaning effective divisors linearly equivalent to $C$) and $D'\in |D|$ is nonsingular and transversal to $C'$. The proof is quite long. Please see \[1\] Theorem V.1.1.  

### 4

Remind adjunction formula (proof is not given in here): Let $Y$ be a nonsingular subvariety of codimension $1$. If we see $Y$ as a divisor and $\cL$ be the associated line bundle sheaf on $X$. Then
\\[\omega_Y=\omega_X\otimes \cL\otimes O_Y\\]
on $O_Y$-modules (see proof for \[1\] Theorem 8.17.) 

Let $C$ be nonsingular curve of **genus** $\dim_k H^1(X,O_X)=g$ (definition is different for general space. There are two types: one is geometric and the other is arithmetic. I will see this later) contained in $S$. 

It is known that the degree of canonical sheaf $\omega_C$ of $C$ is $2g-2$ (see \[1\] Example IV.1.3.3). The degree of $\omega_X\otimes \cL\otimes O_Y$ is given as $C\cdot (C+K)$ where $K$ is a divisor of $S$ that corresponds to $\omega_S$. Thus we have 
\\[2g-2=C\cdot (C+K).\\]

We have very good example. Let $C\subset \bP_k^2$ be a curve of degree $d$. Note that $\omega_{\bP^2_k}\cong O_{\bP_k^2}(-3)$ (see results in the header [2.5](#25)). Then the formula says
\\[2g-2=d(d-3)\\]
which shows
\\[g=\frac{(d-1)(d-2)}{2}.\\]

### Todo

In next post, I might add Riemann-Roch Theorem.

# Reference
I don't want to write references in formal way. To clarify, I added link.

\[1\]: R. Hartshonre, Algebraic Geometry ([link](https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-1-4757-3849-0)).

\[2\]: R. Vakil, THE RISING SEA
Foundations of Algebraic Geometry ([link](https://math.stanford.edu/~vakil/216blog/FOAGnov1817public.pdf))