---
layout: post
title: K3 Surfaces (3)
tags: 
- AG
---
\\[\newcommand{\bA}{\mathbb{A}}
\newcommand{\bR}{\mathbb{R}}
\newcommand{\bC}{\mathbb{C}}
\newcommand{\bD}{\mathbb{D}}
\newcommand{\bF}{\mathbb{F}}
\newcommand{\bG}{\mathbb{G}}
\newcommand{\bH}{\mathbb{H}}
\newcommand{\bN}{\mathbb{N}}
\newcommand{\bP}{\mathbb{P}}
\newcommand{\bQ}{\mathbb{Q}}
\newcommand{\bT}{\mathbb{T}}
\newcommand{\bU}{\mathbb{U}}
\newcommand{\bZ}{\mathbb{Z}}
\newcommand{\cA}{\mathcal{A}}
\newcommand{\cB}{\mathcal{B}}
\newcommand{\cC}{\mathcal{C}}
\newcommand{\cD}{\mathcal{D}}
\newcommand{\cE}{\mathcal{E}}
\newcommand{\cF}{\mathcal{F}}
\newcommand{\cG}{\mathcal{G}}
\newcommand{\cH}{\mathcal{H}}
\newcommand{\cHom}{\mathcal{H}om}
\newcommand{\cI}{\mathcal{I}}
\newcommand{\cJ}{\mathcal{J}}
\newcommand{\cK}{\mathcal{K}}
\newcommand{\cL}{\mathcal{L}}
\newcommand{\cM}{\mathcal{M}}
\newcommand{\cN}{\mathcal{N}}
\newcommand{\cP}{\mathcal{P}}
\newcommand{\cT}{\mathcal{T}}
\newcommand{\cU}{\mathcal{U}}
\newcommand{\cX}{\mathcal{X}}
\newcommand{\fa}{\mathfrak{a}}
\newcommand{\fd}{\mathfrak{d}}
\newcommand{\fm}{\mathfrak{m}}
\newcommand{\fn}{\mathfrak{n}}
\newcommand{\fp}{\mathfrak{p}}
\newcommand{\fq}{\mathfrak{q}}
\newcommand{\Bl}{\text{Bl}}
\newcommand{\Id}{\text{Id}}
\newcommand{\Spec}{\mathrm{Spec}\,}\\]



# Before start

I try to write some pictures what is happening instead of writing a bunch of proof. I am (really) bad at English. Some sentences are not clear and there might be grammar issue. I didn't make 'comment' section. I will write my contact info later.

Note that there are no posts with title $K3$ surfaces (1) or (2). I might add them later or fix this title.

In here, we construct some surfaces and see how it works (starting from checking $K3$...)

# Convention

We work on arbitrary field $k$ (not necessarily algebraically closed field).

Point means closed point. Otherwise I will indicate the type of point (for example: generic point,...)

# Start

## A construction

### 1 

(Several remarks)

An **abelian surface** is an **abelian variety** of dimension $2$. In detail it is a variety of dimension $2$ that satisfies equivalent statement

- A connected and complete algebraic group over $k$.
- A connected and projective algebraic group over $k$.

(Taken from [1] page 8. I'm totally new with this so... I hope it is a good reference)

Let $X$ be a variety over $\overline{k}$ (algebraic closure of $k$) if $\Spec \widehat{O_{X,p}}$ is isomorphic to the completion of the curve $\Spec \overline{k}[x,y]/(f(x,y))$ where $f$ is a homogeneous polynomial of degree $m$ without repeated roots, we say $X$ has an **ordinary multiple point of multiplicity** $m$. When $m=2$, we say $X$ has a (**ordinary**) **double point** at $p$. 

### 2

We construct new surface. Let $A$ be an abelian surface with **involution** $\sigma:A\rightarrow A$ (meaning $\sigma \circ \sigma = -\Id$) defined as multiplication by $-1$. Write 
\\[A^\sigma:=\{x\in A\mid \sigma(x)=x\}\cong A[2] \\] 
(The last set means the set of $2$-torsion points). It is known that there are $16$ rational double points.

One can think $A=\bC^2/\Gamma$ as an example where $\Gamma$ is a lattice of $\bC^2$. It is known as complex torus.

Note that we can consider $A[2]$ as a closed subvariety of $A$ and construct $\widetilde{A}=\Bl_{A[2]}A$. From canonical map $A\rightarrow A/\sigma$ (sending $a\in A$ to its equivalence class), we construct morphisms
\\[\widetilde{A}\rightarrow A\rightarrow A/\sigma\\]

# Reference

I don't want to write references in formal way. To clarify, I added link.

\[1\]: J. S. Milne, Abelian Varieties ([link](https://www.jmilne.org/math/CourseNotes/av.html)).