---
layout: post
title: Grassmannian (1)
tags: 
- AG
---

\\[\newcommand{\bA}{\mathbb{A}}
\newcommand{\bR}{\mathbb{R}}
\newcommand{\bC}{\mathbb{C}}
\newcommand{\bD}{\mathbb{D}}
\newcommand{\bF}{\mathbb{F}}
\newcommand{\bG}{\mathbb{G}}
\newcommand{\bH}{\mathbb{H}}
\newcommand{\bN}{\mathbb{N}}
\newcommand{\bP}{\mathbb{P}}
\newcommand{\bQ}{\mathbb{Q}}
\newcommand{\bT}{\mathbb{T}}
\newcommand{\bU}{\mathbb{U}}
\newcommand{\bZ}{\mathbb{Z}}
\newcommand{\cA}{\mathcal{A}}
\newcommand{\cB}{\mathcal{B}}
\newcommand{\cC}{\mathcal{C}}
\newcommand{\cD}{\mathcal{D}}
\newcommand{\cE}{\mathcal{E}}
\newcommand{\cF}{\mathcal{F}}
\newcommand{\cG}{\mathcal{G}}
\newcommand{\cH}{\mathcal{H}}
\newcommand{\cHom}{\mathcal{H}om}
\newcommand{\cI}{\mathcal{I}}
\newcommand{\cJ}{\mathcal{J}}
\newcommand{\cK}{\mathcal{K}}
\newcommand{\cL}{\mathcal{L}}
\newcommand{\cM}{\mathcal{M}}
\newcommand{\cN}{\mathcal{N}}
\newcommand{\cP}{\mathcal{P}}
\newcommand{\cT}{\mathcal{T}}
\newcommand{\cU}{\mathcal{U}}
\newcommand{\cX}{\mathcal{X}}
\newcommand{\fa}{\mathfrak{a}}
\newcommand{\fd}{\mathfrak{d}}
\newcommand{\fm}{\mathfrak{m}}
\newcommand{\fn}{\mathfrak{n}}
\newcommand{\fp}{\mathfrak{p}}
\newcommand{\fq}{\mathfrak{q}}
\newcommand{\Bl}{\text{Bl}}
\newcommand{\GL}{\mathrm{GL}}
\newcommand{\Gr}{\mathrm{Gr}}
\newcommand{\Hom}{\mathrm{Hom}}
\newcommand{\cHom}{\mathcal{H}om}
\newcommand{\Id}{\mathrm{Id}}
\newcommand{\Pic}{\mathrm{Pic}}
\newcommand{\rProj}{\underline\mathrm{Proj}\,}
\newcommand{\rank}{\mathrm{rank}\,}
\newcommand{\SL}{\mathrm{SL}}
\newcommand{\SO}{\mathrm{SO}}
\newcommand{\Sp}{\mathrm{Sp}}
\newcommand{\rSpec}{\underline\mathrm{Spec}\,}
\newcommand{\Spec}{\mathrm{Spec}\,}
\newcommand{\Sym}{\mathrm{Sym}\,}\\]

# Before Start

This post is more like linear algebra post but I don't know how to add multiple tags.

It is a continuation of [this post](2022-11-18-algebraic-groups1.md). We will see some concrete examples and calculations.

# Convention

Given vector space $V$, $\bP(V)$ is a [projective space](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Projective_space#Definition) with $V$. Also $V$ in here means finite vector space.

We write $e_1,\cdots,e_n$ for standard basis of $V$ where $n=\dim V$ (and it is fixed **in this** post).

# Start

## Grassmannians

To make everything easy, we assume $k=\bC$ be a field of complex numbers. We can change $k$ to arbitrary field but I can't sure if there is a restriction of characteristic of $k$.

### 1

Let $n\geq 1 and $0\leq d$. The **Grassmannian** $\Gr(d,n)$ is a set $d$-dimensional subspaces of $\bC^n$. When $d=0,n$, $\Gr(d,n)$ is a singleton. When $d>n$ or $d<0$, $\Gr(d,n)$ is an empty set. When $d=1$, it is a projective space $\bP^{n-1}$. 

Our goal is to identify Grassmannian into closed subvariety of $\bP^m$ for some number $m$ that depends on $n$ and $d$.

### 2

To do so, we give a coordinate to $\Gr(d,n)$ as follows. Given element $V\in \Gr(d,n)$, we can pick basis $v_1,\cdots,v_d$ of $V$. Then $v_1\wedge\cdots \wedge v_d\in \bP(\bigwedge^d (k^n))$ (an element in [exterior algebra](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exterior_algebra)) is well defined (different choice of basis gives a multiplication). With this construction, there is a map $\Gr(d,n)\rightarrow \bP(\bigwedge^d (k^n))$. It is called (**Plücker map** but I will write Pl**u**cker map)

Here is an example of well defined part. When $d=2,n=3$ (and $k=\bC$) we have $V\in \Gr(2,3)$ generated by $v_1=e_1+e_2$ and $v_2=e_2+e_3$. Note that it has a basis $w_1= 2e_1+3e_2+e_3$ and $w_2=e_2+e_3$. Then
\\[ v_1\wedge v_2=e_1\wedge e_2+e_1\wedge e_3+e_2\wedge e_3\\]
and 
\\[w_1\wedge w_2=2e_1\wedge e_2+2e_1\wedge e_3+2e_2\wedge e_3]
show $2(v_1\wedge v_2)=w_1\wedge w_2$. In this case (and can be extended to prove the well defined part), there is $g\in \GL_2$ such that $w_i=gv_i$ for every $i=1,2$ and the determinant of $g=2$ in this case.

As in the example, the image of Plucker map can be written as sum of 
\\[e_{i_1}\wedge e_{i_2}\wedge\cdots\wedge e_{i_d}\\]
where $i_1< i_2<\cdots i_d$. We call this Plucker coordinate (but my keyboard is bad so I will write Pl**u**cker coordinate). Let $I=\\{i_1,\cdots,i_d\\}$ be a set with $i_1<\cdots<i_d$. we write
$$e_I:=e_{i_1}\wedge \cdots \wedge e_{i_d}.$$


### 3

Before proving $\Gr(d,n)$ is a closed variety of $\bP^m$ for some $m$, we need this.

With Plucker coordinate, one can see $\Gr(d,n)$ is a vector space of dimension $m:=\{n\choose d\}$ (from basic combinatorics).

Let $V$ be a $n$-dimensional vector space. $x\in \bigwedge^d V$ is a **pure wedge** if it is a form of $v_1\wedge \cdots\wedge v_d$ for some $v_i\in V$. Note that $e_1+e_2$ might not be a pure wedge when $d=1$, $n=2$. We will see some criteria of that.

Let $0 \neq x\in \bigwedge^d V$. Consider morphism 
$$\varphi_x:V\rightarrow  \bigwedge^{d_1} V,\quad v\mapsto x\wedge v.$$ 

Followings are equivalent:
1. The kernel of $\varphi_x$ is $d$
2. $x=v_1\wedge \cdots\wedge v_d$ for some linearly independent vectors $v_1,\cdots, v_d\in V$.
3. $x$ is a pure wedge.

Here are some easy parts. $2\Rightarrow 3$ is from definition $3\Rightarrow 2$ comes from if $v_i$ are not linearly independent, then $x=0$. 

Also the dimension of kernel of $\varphi_x$ is equal or less than $d$: Let $f_1,\cdot,f_s$ be basis of $V$ and extend $f_1,\cdots,f_s,f_{s+1},\cdots, f_n$ to basis of $V$ we can write $x=\sum a_I f_I$ into sum of Plucker coordinates with $a_I\neq 0$. If $\varphi_x(f_i)=0$, then $i$ is in the intersection of every $I$. Thus the kernel of $\varphi_x$ is generated by $d$ vectors.

When the dimension of $\ker \varphi_x$ is $d$, there is only one $I$. This ends the proof of $1\Rightarrow 2$. $\square$

We also need this. When $0\neq x=v_1\wedge\cdots \wedge v_d$ is a pure wedge, the kernel of $\varphi_x$ is generated by $v_1,\cdots,v_d$. These are linearly independent from $3\Rightarrow 2$ and are generators from $\varphi_x(v_i)=0$.

### 4

We claim the Plucker map $\Gr(d,n)\rightarrow \bP(\bigwedge^d k^n)=\bP^{m-1}$ is injective and its image is closed in projective space. In other word, we can identify $\Gr(d,n)$ as a projective variety.

If $x_1\wedge\cdots \wedge x_d=y_1\wedge\cdots y_d$ in $\bP^{m-1}$, then the [previous part](###3) says $x_1,\cdots,x_d$ and $y_1,\cdots,y_d$ generate same $d$-dimensional subspace of $k^n$. This ends the proof of injectivity.

The point $x\in \bP^{m-1}$ is the image of the Plucker map if and only if $x$ is a pure wedge if and only if the rank of $\varphi_x$ is $n-d$ if and only if the rank of $\varphi_x$ is $\leq n-d$ (we have an upper bound of the dimension of $\ker\varphi_x$). The linear algebra says the last statement is equivalent to the every $(n-d+1)$ minors of (matrix form of) $\varphi_x$ vanishes (which is a polynomial in terms of entries of $\varphi_x$). Note that the map 
\\[\bigwedge^d k^n\rightarrow \Hom(k^n, \bigwedge^{d+1} k^n),\quad x\mapsto \varphi_x\\]
is a polynomial. This shows the image of the Plucker map is same as the solution of polynomials in $\bP^{m-1}$. $\square$

### 5 

Here is an example what is happening in the proof. (One may wonder, including me, there should be a lot variables while calculating minors) Let $d=2$ and $n=4$ and write $f_i$ be a basis of $\bigwedge^2k^4$ with lexicographic order (from $f_1=e_1\wedge e_2$ to $f_{6}=e_3\wedge e_4$). The proof says (it is not explicitly written) we have the map 
\\[\bigwedge^d k^n\rightarrow \Hom(k^n, \bigwedge^{d+1} k^n),\quad (a_1,\cdots a_6)\mapsto \sum_{i=1}^6 a_i\varphi_{f_i}\\]
and we need to check $3$ minors of $4\times 4$ matrix. We know matrix form of $\varphi_{f_i}$ explicitly. Thus the polynomial looks like
\\[(a_1,\cdots a_6)\mapsto \begin{bmatrix} a_4& a_5& a_6& 0\\\\ -a_2& -a_3& 0 &a_6\\\\ a_1& -a_5& -a_3& 0\\\\ 0 & a_1& a_2&a_4 \end{bmatrix}\\]

(there might be some error up to sign). Then there are 16 $3$ minors with $6$ variables. $a_i$ corresponds to coordinate $f_i$. It can be extended to any $d$ and $n$. In $n\times \{n\choose d\}$ matrix, there are $\{n\choose d\}$ variables (and there are $d$ entries that depends on each variable).

### 6

We can reduce the number of polynomials (using Plucker relations) but I will add later
