---
layout: post
title: K3 Surfaces (1)
tags: 
- AG
---
\\[\newcommand{\bA}{\mathbb{A}}
\newcommand{\bR}{\mathbb{R}}
\newcommand{\bC}{\mathbb{C}}
\newcommand{\bD}{\mathbb{D}}
\newcommand{\bF}{\mathbb{F}}
\newcommand{\bG}{\mathbb{G}}
\newcommand{\bH}{\mathbb{H}}
\newcommand{\bN}{\mathbb{N}}
\newcommand{\bP}{\mathbb{P}}
\newcommand{\bQ}{\mathbb{Q}}
\newcommand{\bT}{\mathbb{T}}
\newcommand{\bU}{\mathbb{U}}
\newcommand{\bZ}{\mathbb{Z}}
\newcommand{\cA}{\mathcal{A}}
\newcommand{\cB}{\mathcal{B}}
\newcommand{\cC}{\mathcal{C}}
\newcommand{\cD}{\mathcal{D}}
\newcommand{\cE}{\mathcal{E}}
\newcommand{\cF}{\mathcal{F}}
\newcommand{\cG}{\mathcal{G}}
\newcommand{\cH}{\mathcal{H}}
\newcommand{\cHom}{\mathcal{H}om}
\newcommand{\cI}{\mathcal{I}}
\newcommand{\cJ}{\mathcal{J}}
\newcommand{\cK}{\mathcal{K}}
\newcommand{\cL}{\mathcal{L}}
\newcommand{\cM}{\mathcal{M}}
\newcommand{\cN}{\mathcal{N}}
\newcommand{\cP}{\mathcal{P}}
\newcommand{\cT}{\mathcal{T}}
\newcommand{\cU}{\mathcal{U}}
\newcommand{\cX}{\mathcal{X}}
\newcommand{\fa}{\mathfrak{a}}
\newcommand{\fd}{\mathfrak{d}}
\newcommand{\fm}{\mathfrak{m}}
\newcommand{\fn}{\mathfrak{n}}
\newcommand{\fp}{\mathfrak{p}}
\newcommand{\fq}{\mathfrak{q}}
\newcommand{\Bl}{\text{Bl}}
\newcommand{\cHom}{\mathcal{H}om}
\newcommand{\Id}{\text{Id}}
\newcommand{\Pic}{\mathrm{Pic}}
\newcommand{\rank}{\mathrm{rank}\,}
\newcommand{\rProj}{\underline\mathrm{Proj}\,}
\newcommand{\Spec}{\mathrm{Spec}\,}\\]

# Before start

A post abouot $K3$ surface. I try to write technical details in other post. I try to follow \[1\] and a lecture note \[2\] (order of topics came from \[2\] but content might come from \[1\]).

# Convention

Usually $k$ means a field (not necessarily algebraically closed).

**Variety** over $k$ means a separated, geometrically integral scheme of finite type over $k$.

I mostly write divisor for Weil divisor. If it is a Cartier divisor, then I indicate it.

# Start

## Definition & Examples

### 1 

An **algebraic** $K3$ **surface** over $k$ is a nonsingular variety $X$ (with structure sheaf $O_X$) of dimension $2$ that satisfies

- $\omega_X=O_X$ and
- $H^1(X,O_X)=0$.

where $\omega_X$ is a canonical sheaf of $X$ (or known as $\wedge^2 \Omega_{X/k}$ or $K_X$).

**Note.** I mainly discuss algebraic $K3$ surface instead of $K3$ surface from complex geometry. I will write $K3$ surface instead of algebraic $K3$ surface. If I want to discuss in complex geometry, I will distinguish them.

### 2

We derive several easy things from the definition.

#### 2.1

The rank of $\omega_X=O_X$ is $1$. Thus we can associate divisor $K_X$ to $\omega_X$ (up to equivalence. By using identification of divisor classes and the group of line bundles (or called **Picard group**)).

I only write $K_X$ for divisor not for canonical sheaf.

#### 2.2

The rank of $\Omega_X$ is $2$ because the rank of $\omega_X=\wedge^2 \Omega_X$ is $1={\rank\Omega_X\choose 2}$.

#### 2.3

From rank of $\Omega_X$ is $2$, we have a (natural) pairing $\Omega_X\times \Omega_X\rightarrow \omega_X$. 

---
*Remark this fact:* Let $\cF$ be a locally free sheaf of rank $n$. Then there is a map 
\\[\wedge^r \cF \otimes_{O_X} \wedge^{n-r}\cF\rightarrow \wedge^n \cF\\]
such that 
\\[\wedge^r \cF\rightarrow (\wedge^{n-r} \cF)^\vee\otimes_{O_X} \wedge^n \cF\\]
is an isomorphism. (see \[3\] Section 7.5 then solve \[3\] Exercise 7.27 and 7.28)

---

Then we can write the tangent sheaf of $X$ by
\\[\cT_X:=\Omega_X^\vee=\cHom(\Omega_X, O_X)\cong \Omega_X.\\]

#### 2.4

Remark that smooth **complete** ($X$ is complete if $X\rightarrow \Spec k$ is proper) surface is projective. Because we are playing on scheme over $k$, any $K3$ surface is projective.

#### 2.5

Variety $X$ over field $k$ is irreducible hence connected. Using $H^0(X,O_X)$ is a finite dimensional $k$-veector space (see \[4\] Theorem II.5.19.) and it doesn't have nontrivial idempotent, it should be $k$.

### 3

Here are some examples of $K3$ surfaces. In here, we review several algebraic geometry facts.

#### 3.1

Let $X\subset \bP^3$ be a smooth **quartic** (defined by single irreducible polynomial whose degree is $4$). We claim $X$ is a $K3$ surface.

The first cohomology of $H^1(X,O_X)$ comes from short exact sequence

\\[0\rightarrow O(-4)\xrightarrow{\times f} O\rightarrow i_*O_X\rightarrow 0 \\]
where $i:X\rightarrow \bP^3$ is an inclusion.

The **adjunction formula** (see \[4\] Proposition II.8.20.) says
\\[\omega_X=(\omega_{\bP^3}\otimes O(4))|\_{O\_X}= (O(-4)\otimes O(4))|\_{O\_X}=O_X\\]
(see \[4\] Example II.8.20.1 for calculation of canonical sheaf of $\bP^n$)

#### 3.2

(Generalization of **3.1** case) Let $n\geq 0$ and $X=\bP^{n+2}$. Let $S$ be a **complete intersection** (the homogeneous ideal $I$ of $S$ is generated by the number of codimension of $S$ in $X$ with elements in $A:=k[x_0,\cdots,x_{n+2}]$) given as $V(f_1,\cdots,f_n)$ with homogeneous element $f_i\in A$. 

We have a formula (it can be derived from the adjunction formula. \[3\] Example II.8.20.3, Exercise II.8.4. give a more discussion) 
$$\omega_S= O_X\bigg(-n-1+\sum_i \deg f_i \bigg)\Bigg\vert_S.$$

Furthermore we have an exact sequence (from closed subscheme)
$$0\rightarrow \cI_1+\cdots \cI_n \rightarrow O_X\rightarrow i_*O_S$$
where $\cI_i=O(-\deg f_i)$ is the ideal sheaf of closed subscheme $V(f_i)$ of $X$. Set
\\[M:=\sum_i \deg f_i\\]

Remark this fact (see \[4\] Section III.5 but I prefer \[5\] Theorem 18.1.3.) 

 - If $m\geq 0$, then $H^0(X,O(m))$ is a free $k$-module with rank ${n+m \choose m}$.
- If $m\leq -n-1$, then $H^n(X,O(m))$ is a free $k$-module with rank ${-m-1 \choose -n-m-1}$
- Otherwese, $H^r(X,O(m))=0$.

(this is true when $k$ is changed into noethrian ring $A$ with $X=\bP^n_A$)

Then we have
$H^1(X,O_X(-M))=0$ if and only if $M=n+3$.

Then one can check $S$ is a $K3$ surface if and only if $M=n+3$.

### 3.3

(Kummer surface but I don't define Kummer surface in here. I don't know general definition of Kummer surface) 

Let $A$ be an **abelian surface** over $k$. It is an **abelian variety** (a complete connected group variety) with dimension $2$. Consider involution $i:A\rightarrow A$, $a\mapsto -a$.

It is known that there are $16$ two torsion points (equivalently fixed points of involution). 


# Reference

I don't want to write references in formal way. To clarify, I added link.

\[1\]: D. Huybrechts, Lectures on K3 surfaces ([link](https://www.math.uni-bonn.de/people/huybrech/K3Global.pdf)).

\[2\]: Georg Oberdieck, Lecture note on $K3$ surfaces ([link](http://www.math.uni-bonn.de/~georgo/K3/index.html)). I think full lecture note ends the date of oral exam (roughly end of January 2023)

\[3\]: Ulrich Görtz, Torsten Wedhorn, Algebraic Geometry I: Schemes With Examples and Exercises ([link](https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-658-30733-2)).

\[4\]: R. Hartshonre, Algebraic Geometry ([link](https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-1-4757-3849-0)).

\[5\]: R. Vakil, THE RISING SEA
Foundations of Algebraic Geometry ([link](https://math.stanford.edu/~vakil/216blog/FOAGnov1817public.pdf))